---
layout: post
title:  "A Case Against Currency Devaluation for Developing Countries"
date:   2021-02-20 19:56:20 -0700
categories: 
---

## Introduction: Appearances Can Be Deceiving
As an investor and observer of financial trends and global markets, I have come to understand that one of the shortcomings of the discipline of Economics is the thinking that all things are equal, and humans are rational beings concerning the laws that govern supply and demand. This conclusion is a gross misconception because outside of the academic realm, all things are never truly equal but made to appear so, and humans are irrational beings and overly emotional, especially in times of difficulties and financial peril.

In a sense, the discipline of Economics is human-made, unlike Mathematics or other branches of natural sciences, where the answers to a problem are predictable and precise. Therefore, Economics as a discipline cannot be subjected to the laws of the natural sciences; hence, why one must be wary of any economic predictions or models that promote themselves as infallible.

On one hand, this discipline in question has interpreted the dynamics that regulate the supply and demand of our financial world, but on the other, it fails to change it, which is inconsistent with other schools of thought on its own accord. To address the latter, one must adopt a sense of perception and going outside of the academic setting to understand the cycles of all the world’s financial markets from the lens of an actual investor and how individuals and business decisions impact those cycles ―microeconomics, and also the decisions made by countries and governments ―macroeconomics.

I once had the privilege of an informal discourse with a professor of Economics from a distinguished college at a conference before the pandemic. In our spirited exchange, I asked her, “What happens when a municipality, principality, or country decides not to honor its debts to its creditors?” She took a long pause, sighed, smiled, and said, “Nothing.” She then concluded, “Absolutely nothing will happen except that no municipality, principality, or country would want to lose its credibility.” I shooked my head left and right, and uttered, "So, this is largely a game of saving face, huh?" She nodded quietly, and said, "By and large, yes." In the recent rise of populism, nationalism, and protectionism across Africa, Europe, Asia, and sadly; here in the United States, my adopted country of residence; that question is even more relevant today, especially when the debts of these countries continue to skyrocket at unprecedented levels.

The debt situation in developing countries is much worse and keeps rising as they continue to yield to international pressure, notably from the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, and the World Trade Organization ―institutions which are part of the problem, to devalue their currencies further. Devaluation, therefore, is the real focus of this article. So, what happens when a country or principality refuses to devalue its currency?

Austerity measures have always ended up taking more from these developing countries than the support they bring, and even at the best of times, the citizens of these developing countries have never felt the benefit of their nation’s prosperity. They have never had their fair share of the common-wealth. Except perhaps, for agricultural, natural gas, and crude oil subsidies to avoid a national rebellion or a revolution.

The same cannot hypothesize of the economic thieves and treasury looters who are the bane of these countries’ developments. If the present realities are any measure of economic palliative taken in the past, then these countries have failed woefully in that regard. It is a slothful, selfish, and cynical prescription for these foreign monetary institutions and creditors to always recommend devaluation to these developing countries as a way out of economic recession.

## Nigeria: A Simple Case Study
Austerity measures are often at times reactions to gross mismanagement of the economy. But for some wicked and corrupt administrations, these developing countries would not get to this point. Let’s explore Nigeria, my country of birth, and a nation situated on the Gulf of Guinea, as a simple case study.

After running the economy aground between 1979–1983, President Shehu Shagari in the 1980s imposed extreme austerity measures which paved the way for several military coups resulting in the administration of President Ibrahim Badamasi Babangida in 1985. Babangida, with his master manipulative skills coupled with an iron fist, forced the citizens of Nigerians into accepting the Structural Adjustment Program backed by the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, and the World Trade Organization; and set off a regime of an unending devaluation of the country’s currency.

Despite the return of a quasi-democracy in the late 1990s along with a multi-party system and over a decade reign of the People’s Democratic Party under different administrations, corruption and excessive borrowing were at an all-time high. With little to show for it and made the Nigerian Naira value nosedive regressively.

From a very strong Nigerian Naira after securing independence from its formal colonial power that was at par with the British Pound Sterling and doubled the value of the United States Dollar emerged a weak and emaciated currency by the late 1980s, yet Western financial institutions tell the Nigerian government to devalue further. It’s no secret that this is the dilemma facing not just Nigeria but indeed Africa, and the rest of the developing world at large.

Upon my analysis, I find myself with more questions rather than answers.

How many African or developing countries that followed the economic models of these powerful financial institutions are better off today?
When countries in the West suffer economic recessions, why do they not swallow the bitter pill of devaluation as a way out?
What have been the gains of the aggressive devaluation of the Nigerian Naira over the years?
In 2008, the United States found itself bankrupt at the end of President Bush’s ill-advised administration. It took his successor, President Obama, with the consent of the United States Congress to launch massive soft socialist bailout initiatives, which benefited the big banks to my dismay, to slowly accelerate the economy while striking a delicate balance with American psychic that has been so blinded by extreme Capitalism and Individualism to restore the country on the path of prosperity. The majority of nations in the European Union have, on various occasions, slump but never had to devalue their currencies to the level they want Nigerian Naira to be, not even profoundly bankrupt Greece despite tough negotiations with Germany and the European Union.

It’s disturbing that the majority of the finance ministers, secretaries, and governors of the national banks of these developing countries are all educated at prestigious colleges and universities in the West. But, continue to apply these demulcent measures to their countries economy without much to show for it, let alone write home about. Instead, these leaders have only made their respective countries worse for it.

The logical assessment I came to is all these shows that the solution to Nigeria’s and the majority of these developing countries’ economic torment does not lie outside but within their borders. One can argue that a way forward lies in collectively taking their destiny into their hands at every level of government in their respective countries. Perhaps, these developing countries can learn from Lee Kuan Yew, the founding father of Singapore and its leader from 1959 to 1990; and from Deng Xiaoping, the paramount leader of the People's Republic of China from 1978 to 1989. These two men represented what it means to "Ask not what your country can do for you, but what you can do for your country," as uttered by John F. Kennedy in 1961 as a challenge to the American society to contribute more to improving the public good.

## Conclusion: A Possible Path Forward
Devaluation impoverishes and worsens the plight of these developing nations' citizens and makes them poorer than the rest of the world. To put it plainly, the take-home pay of the average citizen of these developing nations has shrunk; one pays more for goods and services. Not only that, one pays more for any goods one is importing into their respective countries promoting a vicious cycle and a zero-sum game. The salaries of their average citizen can never go up in the same proportion as price levels, which is the case for even the most prosperous nations in the West and the East.

I remembered as a young man growing up in the slums of Nigeria in the 1990s, I could survive on a budget of approximately ₦50.00 a day without accounting for accommodation or other luxury activities, but when I visited the city of Lagos in 2014, approximately ₦3000.00 is not enough now for the average Nigerian citizen. These outcomes to mention a few, are the ill-advised and ill-conceived borrowing economic models based solely on the guidance from the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, World Trade Organization, and other unfair creditors.

A possible path forward is for these developing countries to strengthen their export base, diversify their economy through a revolutionized purpose-driven agriculture, education, equity, strong democratic values and institutions, intense development of their abundant mineral resources, and promote a legislative body or a think-tank to commission a study on how they can mutually benefit from micro-lending for small and medium-sized businesses, macro-leading for big businesses or the ones considered too big to fail, venture and stakeholder capitalism for entrepreneurs in all sectors of the market, and from globalization with their trading partners.

Every inch of these developing countries’ lands is so blessed that all it takes is to harness their natural resources, in some cases. The days are long gone when politicians and policymakers should see their station as an invitation to embezzle and deprive their fellow citizens from the collective bargaining process but rather a chance to provide useful and honest services and to develop their societies for the good of all.

On the bright side, these developing countries can navigate their way out of their present challenges. Nigeria, along with many developing countries, is a very attractive nation with rich natural resources, resilient people imbued with an indomitable can-do spirit, and work ethic. A potential lender that insists on their devaluation is a lousy partner and not needed.

The majority of these developing countries have markets for goods, services, and cheap labor. If they collectively and consciously get their acts right, they will always attract genuine investments because these countries are significant in the comity of nations and can afford to tell shylock lenders to go away politely. Even if they must borrow, let them do so with friendly financial institutions and partners that offer favorable terms and not insist on their currency devaluation.
